# NanoscopeAFM_ForceCurve_analysis


## _Introduction_ 
These scripts are made with the intent of processing force curves obtained using most of the commercially available Atomic Force Microscopes (AFMs) from Bruker (https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Atomic_force_microscopy). A force curve describes the process of indentation of a biological sample (chromosomes in this particular case) by a sharp tip (https://www.nature.com/articles/s42254-018-0001-7). The curves record the force related to the indentation of the tip and its retraction from the sample, from them, multiple biophysical parameters related to the mechanical and structural properties of the sample can be retrieved. 

## _Workflow_

Both _Nanoscope_converter.py_ , _nanoscope_CurvesContactPoint_determination.py_ and _nanoscope_CurveFit.py_ are used within the different clustering analyses (_PCA_KMeans_Clustering_ and _LongitudinalClustering_DTW_). In both clustering analyses, a set of 1000+ curves (stored as raw binary files coming from the instrument) is parsed, converted into arrays which are then processed in order to be used by clustering algorithms. 
For both clustering analyses, curves are corrected for background noise, aligned in order to be better compared, fitted using splines etc.

***PCA_KMeans_Clustering:***

In **_Chrm_IndentationAnalysis.py_**, for each curve multiple features are extracted, corresponding to biophysical parameters, like the "contact point" (i.e., where the first value of force > 0 is recorded), the max pushing force, derivatives of force, energy of indentation etc...; this allows performing further clustering analyses (_**PCA_analysis.py**_ and **_KMeans.py_**).

***LongitudinalClustering_DTW:***

This folder contains a Longitudinal Clustering analysis; which attempts to cluster the curves based only on their shape. Within _**LongitudinalClustering_DataPrep.py**_, curves are preprocessed and their values are stored in an appropriate format for future analyses within .csv files (x and y values are kept separated). _**LongitudinalClustering_analysis.py**_ contains two types of longitudinal clustering functions, one based on the estimation of the Euclidean distance and the other on Dynamic Time Warping (DTW), more information on the latter can be found here: https://paul-mora.com/classification/time-series/clustering/python/Dynamic-Time-Warping-Explanation-and-Testing-on-Audio-and-Tabular-Data/. Given that DTW is quite demanding in terms of computing power, the DTW analysis has been parallelized within _**DTW_parallelization.py**_. The results of the longitudinal clustering analyses consist of the so-called distance matrices (stored as .csv files, condensed_distances.csv and condensed_distances_parallel.csv). The distance matrix is then used in _**Clustering_ResultsPlotting.py**_ to produce the dendrogram that cluster the curves and to plot the obtained clusters (see figures).


## _Contents_

Scripts for processing the force curves from Bruker AFMs. The folder "_Example_RawData_" contains examples of raw data used to test the scripts. The folder "_Example_figures_" contains the figures that are generated by the various scripts.

_**- Nanoscope_converter.py**:_ this script is a parser that reads the raw binary file containing the info on the force curve coming from the microscope and extract the information that allow plotting and processing the force curve (a representative figure of its output is present in the folder).

_**- nanoscope_CurvesContactPoint_determination.py**:_ this script contains two different functions that can be used to identify the contact point along the indenting force curve.

_The above-mentioned scripts are used within the other ones to process multiple curves and perform various analyses._

_**- nanoscope_CurveFit.py**:_ this script contains 2 different functions that allow processing and analysing the force curves. The first one is used to fit the indenting force curve with appropriate contact mechanics models; the second functions calculates the area under the indenting and retracting curve in order to extract information on the viscoelasticity of the sample (representative figures of its output is present in the folder).

_**- Chrm_IndentationAnalysis.py**:_ this script is used to analyse the force curves within the Example_RawData/Chromosomes folder, which refers to indentation experiments on multiple chromosomes. The script processes each curve (employing the previously mentioned scripts/functions) and extract useful parameters, like max force, derivatives, area under curve etc..., saving them into a .csv file for further clustering analyses.

_**- PCA_analysis.py**:_ reads the .csv file generated by Chrm_IndentationAnalysis.py and performs a PCA analysis in order to cluster curves having different shape and hence properties into distinct clusters. (a representative figure of its output is present in the folder)

_**- KMeans.py**:_ similar to PCA_analysis.py but performs KMean clustering on the data contained in the .csv file generated by Chrm_IndentationAnalysis.py (a representative figure of its output is present in the folder).

_**- LongitudinalClustering_DataPrep.py**:_ this script is used to analyse the force curves within the Example_RawData/Chromosomes folder, which refers to indentation experiments on multiple chromosomes. The script processes all the traces and store their x and y values into separate .csv files for the longitudinal clustering analysis.

_**- LongitudinalClustering_analysis.py**:_ this script performs longitudinal clustering of the traces according to two different algorithms. The first one is simply based on the calculation of the euclidean distance between each curve, while the second one perform a Dynamic Time Warping (DTW) analysis, which is a more sophisticated version than the euclidean distance, accounting for potential offsets etc... The results of these analyses are the so-called distance matrices, which are stored in appropriate .csv files.

_**- DTW_parallelization.py**:_ DTW is computationally expensive; in this script the DTW analysis is parallelized in order to be faster and more efficient (thanks to parallelization the DTW analysis is more than 4x faster); the result (the distance matrix) is always stored in .csv file.

_**- Clustering_ResultsPlotting.py**:_ this script takes the distance matrices as input and produce a dendrogram that cluster the curves into multiple hierarchical clusters. Choosing the number of clusters we want to produce, it is then possible to see the different curve classified in separate clusters only based on their shapes (refer to appropriate figures in the _Example_figures_ folder).